Ooh, such a good God you are, that you give yourself to us, that you never lead us in places where we will not be accompanied by you.
Thank you, Lord, that you part the waters, you part the sea for us to go through on dry ground.
Thank you, that you stay with us through our journey.
God, as we continue this journey, not just through the Exodus story, but through our lives,
We pray that we would know your company, and know your comfort, know your peace, your provision, know your presence.
Lord, to whom shall we go?
You have the words of everlasting life.
Lord, these words are given to us now.
So we pray that you would open up our hearts and our minds and our ears.
Open us up to what you have to say to us through your word this morning.
Help us to know you as you reveal yourself.
We pray, O Lord, that we would humbly come before you.
They would be willing to receive a challenge and conviction from your word and from your spirit, Lord, and more so that we would know the grace and the love that you give to us in Jesus Christ.
And pray that you'd be with our youngest in the nursery, that they would know your love through the nursery workers, and that they would be blessed in sharing that love.
Learn that you would bless our students downstairs as they learn who you are with their friends, through our teachers.
We pray that they would understand who you are even from a young age.
And for us, O Lord, help us to learn to live like Christ, so that this world might know your goodness.
I pray these things in His name, amen.
All right, so this is a sermon series that we're going through as we begin this year, as we begin this journey into our new mission as a church.
We're looking at the Exodus, just chapters 15 through 19.
And people of Israel have just finished their song of praise.
They've been singing glory to the Lord who saved them from Pharaoh, who rescued them from slavery in Egypt.
You remember he brought the waters of the Red Sea over their enemy and now they're setting out on their journey.
Well, it doesn't take long for the first challenge to come up.
It doesn't take long for God to start work through his people though.
He works on their lives and he tells him through this episode, what we're gonna see is that you are broken.
You need healing, and I am the one to do it."
So we're gonna be looking at Exodus chapter 15 verses 22 to 27.
Again, this comes just after the song of Moses praising God for their deliverance.
Exodus chapter 15 verses 22 to 27.
Here God's word.
Then Moses led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went into the desert of shore.
For three days they traveled in the desert without finding water.
When they came to Mara, they could not drink its water because it was bitter.
That is why the place is called Mara.
So the people grumbled against Moses saying, what are we to drink?
And Moses cried out to the Lord and the Lord showed him a piece of wood.
He threw it into the water and the water became fit to drink.
There the Lord issued a ruling and instruction for them and put them to the test.
He said, if you listen carefully to the Lord, your God, and do what is right in his eyes, if you pay attention to his commands and keep all of his decrees, I will not bring on you any of these diseases I brought on the Egyptians, for I am the Lord who heals you."
Then they came to Elam, where there were 12 springs and 70 palm trees, and they camped there near the water.
This is the word of the Lord, and together we say, thanks be to God.
Well, this large mass of people, they enter into this unforgiving wilderness.
Maybe tens of thousands were told, hundreds of thousands in the Exodus story.
They're entering into the desert of shore.
Then you have the hot sun, the hot sand that is kind of radiating heat from underneath them.
You have the sun overhead that is bearing down on them.
And these people have inadequate supplies of resources.
They don't have enough food, enough water to accompany all these men, women, children, and their animals.
They're off in the desert, and they need drink.
I don't know if you remember a movie called The Three Amigos.
Do you remember The Three Amigos?
Three Amigos, it has, do you remember Martin Short?
Steve Martin and Chevy Chase.
Well, they're journeying through this desert, this barren wilderness on horses.
The sun is beating down on them and they come to a place where they're exhausted and they need a drink.
And so they stop and they get out their cantines.
The first one, Lucky, played by Steve Martin.
He holds up his canteen and just a couple drips of water come out onto his tongue.
Then it pans over to the next one who is Ned played by Martin Short.
He opens his canteen to remember that fills his mouth.
sand.
Yeah, a bunch of sand fills his mouth.
His face is covered in sand.
And then it goes over to the third one, Dusty, played by Chevy Chase.
He opens his up and it's full.
He drinks.
He starts chugging the water and it's filling his mouth.
It's flowing down his chin onto his garments.
He takes another drink.
He swishes it around his mouth.
He garbles and he spits it out, he takes another drink, and then he tosses the canteen onto the ground or it lands on its side and it spills out onto the dry, cracked ground of the desert.
And these other two guys, they're just staring at him longingly.
They're desperate for a drink.
All they want is to satisfy their thirst.
This is Israel.
They've been wandering in the wilderness, the desert for three days now, and they need drink.
Well, they come to this place, this place called Mara, and they see water in the distance.
And we can imagine them, they run excitedly to this place of water.
You can imagine just throwing themselves at this body of water, either with their hands or just sticking their face straight down, ready for a refreshing drink, ready to be nourished.
And it's bitter.
It's unpalatable.
You cannot drink this water.
In order for these people to be refreshed by the water, this bitter water needs to be made sweet.
This bitter water needs to be healed.
Now this is a picture of where Israel is at as they come out of slavery from Egypt.
They're broken.
These people are in need of healing.
Now for 400 years, we talked about this last week a little bit, for 400 years they have been enslaved to the Egyptians.
They have known nothing other than depending on Egypt, depending on Pharaoh for their land, for their resources, for their food, for their water, for their protection, for everything.
They've been living among people who worship Pharaoh, who worship these foreign gods.
And so although the Israelites have been delivered, although they've been, they're on the other side of the Red Sea, their hearts are still in Egypt.
And we see this brokenness come out.
Before, even before they cross through the dry ground of the Red Sea, do you remember when Pharaoh's army is bearing down on them?
They turn to Moses and they cry to Moses, they say, Moses, why did you bother us?
Why didn't you just leave us alone?
Let us just go back and serve the Egyptians now.
Well, then after they come through and our passage will now, they have been in the wilderness for three days and they're grumbling.
They're complaining they're murmuring against Moses.
In the coming weeks, we'll look at their hunger where their bellies start talking to them and they say, well, back in Egypt, back in Egypt, we had potfuls of meat.
We had everything that we needed.
These people, they've just seen the walls of the Red Sea stand on and so that they can pass through.
They have recently experienced miracle after miracle, plague after plague delivered on Egypt in their behalf.
Now, even now, they have the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire that leads them by night and leads them by day, and yet they still
are so broken, they cannot trust the Lord.
Their bodies may be free.
They may be physically separated from Egypt, and yet their hearts, their desires, their affections, they still are often returning to Egypt.
They are so broken that they cannot trust the Lord and His provision.
These people are bitter.
These people are broken.
These people need healing.
That's like us.
We too.
We are bitter.
We are broken.
And we need healing.
We need healing physically.
Now, I'm 41.
And some of you will say, well, that's old.
And some of you will say, oh, you're just a pup.
You're just a young guy.
But I'll tell you, I'm recovering from a sprained ankle.
I'm recovering from an SI joint injury in my back.
I'm working through some digestive issues trying to, trying a new diet to figure out what's going on with me.
This week I'm going to go see the dermatologist because I have some more like pre-cancerous spots on my face.
Yeah, I'm 41.
Does anybody, can anybody relate to me?
Yes, our bodies, our bodies, our frail, our hips and our knees start to wear down and we need replacements.
Our bodies are subject to infections, viral infections, bacterial infections, and we wear down.
Our bodies, our minds, they get weak, they get frail, they get forgetful.
We need physical healing.
And we also need emotional healing, though.
We need to be healed emotionally because we are bitter people.
For some of us, bitterness is a regular attitude by which we live life.
Maybe we've been hurt in the past, and so we have a tendency to hold on to grudges, deep grudges.
Maybe we view the lens through which we view life, people, scenarios, we always assume the worst, and so we find it hard to trust.
And maybe we feel like we have received the short straw of life, and so we are well versed in this language of complaint.
We have a tendency to be bitter people.
We need to be healed.
We approach life through bitterness or anxiety or fear, and we need to be healed emotionally.
But we also need a spiritual healing.
I think for many of us, it's common that the way that we view God is not the God who is revealed to us in his word, but it's the God that kind of manifests from our family and from our upbringing.
So maybe mom, mom or dad were angry people.
And we think, okay, so God must be an angry God.
Or mom, or dad, or very hard to please, hard to receive and win affection from.
You had to earn affection, so, oh God, we must have to jump some pretty high hurdles.
You might have to jump through some hoops to earn God's love and earn God's affection.
Or maybe we were hurt by somebody.
Somebody close to us and we think, oh God, he must not be willing to protect me.
He must not be able to protect me.
And so we're broken.
spiritually, even though we are on the other side of the Red Sea.
Even though we know that in Christ we stand before God faultless, our mind, our words, our actions, well, they are still given over to sin.
We may be set free.
Maybe we've been set free from being enslaved to work.
Maybe we're retired now, but we still give ourselves and find our ultimate value in what we produce.
Maybe we've been set free from bondage to pornography or lust, and yet we still give ourselves to this acceptable lust or refined comfort in it.
Or maybe we're looking for affection and we give our bodies in response, looking for somebody to think highly of us.
We're wanting somebody to love us so we give our bodies in inappropriate ways.
We are broken people who need healing physically.
emotionally, spiritually.
The Reformer Martin Luther is a famous saying in Latin, it's a similar Eustis, Ed Pecodor.
It means a similar same time, a righteous and sinner.
Even though we are saved, even though we have been delivered and brought free, brought free through the red seat, we are delivered from slavery to sin in Jesus Christ, and we still give ourselves over to sin.
We are at the same time righteous, justified, and set free by God, and yet we continue to give ourselves and thought and word and indeed over to sin.
We are broken people.
We are bitter people.
We are people who need healing.
Well, thanks be to God that He reveals to us one of His names, Yahweh Rafa in this passage that we have.
God reveals to us part of who He is.
Now in the Old Testament, in the Old Testament in Hebrew language, names are important.
It's not just all that name sounds cool, so I'm gonna name somebody that names are given for character, names are given for what this person will do or kind of what they have done.
So names, you see the name of Abraham and it means a father of many or a father of the multitudes.
The name Sarah means a princess of the nations or mother of the multitudes, Jacob.
His name comes from a saying that means deceiver.
It tells you the character of the person.
One, the Old Testament, and we have a name for God.
It tells us who God is.
It tells us his nature, his character, and his relationship with the people.
In the Old Testament, God's name, he reveals himself through names in many occasions.
You have El Shaddai.
You know, El Shaddai is?
God Almighty, a lower Almighty.
And we have Yahweh Yira, or Jehovah Jair, you know what that means?
The Lord, yeah, the Lord provides.
Yeah, you have Yahweh Shalom.
The Lord is peace.
You have Yahweh Sabayoth.
From the song, the mighty fortresses are God.
He is the Lord of power or the Lord of hosts.
Well in our passage that God reveals himself as Yahweh Rafah.
Yahweh, Rafah.
Yahweh, Yahweh is this word that's in our Old Testament, it is Lord and all capital letters.
This is the covenant name for God, this very personal name for God that's given to the people.
So early on in Exodus in chapter three, when Moses is meeting with the Lord and he says, well, you want me to go to these people, but who do I tell them to send me?
And he says, well, tell them that Yahweh, the Lord sends him.
And he says, I am who I am.
is sending you, telling that the God, the Lord of their fathers, has sent you.
So this is God's personal covenant name, the Lord.
But then attached to this personal covenant name is this name Rafa.
This word that means to heal, to bring to health, or to restore the name Rafa'el means healed, healed of the Lord, the Lord heals.
So we have the Lord who reveals himself as the Lord who heals.
The Lord who heals.
Now, it makes sense.
It would make sense to us if this passage says to the people I, he reveals himself as I am the Lord who heals the bitter waters.
Because remember, they're journeying through the wilderness.
They're three days into it.
They have little water.
It is hot in this desert wilderness.
There are no resources that people cry out to Moses.
Moses cries out to God.
God shows Moses a tree or a stick.
It could be translated, a branch, a piece of wood.
We don't know, but he throws it into the bitter waters of Mara and it becomes sweet.
It becomes fit to drink.
Now it would make sense if the Lord said, though I am the Lord who heals the bitter waters.
That would make sense.
But there's a pronoun that's attached to the verb that's you.
I am the Lord who heals you.
I am the Lord your healer.
God doesn't say I am the Lord who heals the bitter waters.
He says, I am the Lord who heals you.
I am the Lord your healer.
Well, God knows what His people need.
Yes, they need water.
Yes, they need physical refreshment, but more so in a deeper need, they need Him.
These people have spent 400 years in servitude to the Egyptians.
400 years depending on them, the Lord knows that they're broken, the Lord knows that they're bitter.
Way back in Exodus chapter one, it says that the Egyptians made their lives
bitter through harsh labor.
The Lord knows that they need their hearts to be healed.
They need their hearts to be turned back to Him.
And so God reveals Himself to them as the Lord, your healer, Yahweh, Rafa.
And we see that this is what He does.
The Lord heals them.
The Lord brings them, He heals the water, bringing them refreshment, allowing them to drink.
But then He leads them to this place called Elum, this place that has, do you remember how many springs?
It's 12, it was 12 springs.
Why is 12 significant for these Hebrew people?
The 12 tribes, so maybe, maybe God is saying, I'm gonna take care of you.
But also there's,
There's 70 palm trees.
This seven is a perfect number, 10 is a number of completeness.
I don't make too much of it, but maybe the Lord is saying, this is how I am going to care for you.
I am your healer.
I am going to provide an abundance.
There's going to be a steady supply of provision for you.
I am giving you a foretaste of what I'm going to do for you as I bring you into my presence.
I am the Lord your healer."
Now we, in this passage, we're familiar with this, right?
We're familiar with the wilderness wanderings, and so the temptation is to read back into this passage God's anger.
We wanna say, oh yes, they're murmuring, they're complaining, God is upset, they're already doing things to provoke God's anger now.
They will, they will in continued weeks we'll see.
They provoke God's anger because they continue to refuse to trust Him.
But in this passage,
There is not anger towards the people.
There is not contempt towards the people.
This is the Lord who is their healer.
And we see Him providing, providing refreshment at the waters of Mara, providing this sense of the foretaste.
And then there's this provision of guidance, guidance and instruction.
Now the Lord, He doesn't give them these instructions before
before they come through the Red Sea.
He gives them these instructions after they come through the Red Sea.
These are the ways my people are gonna stay close to me.
These are the ways that I'm going to bring about your healing.
This in itself is an act of grace.
God's command, God's word, God's guidance for them because the Lord is their healer.
Well, the Lord too is our healer.
And we see this most clearly, of course, in the person of Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ, the great physician who heals our infirmities, who meets us in our disease and takes care of us, who takes care of our diseases as the prophet Isaiah says.
The Lord who comes to call not the righteous, but the sinner.
The Lord who comes not to call the healthy, but the
But the sick, Jesus Christ is our healer.
We see it most clearly in what he does.
Remember, Jesus Christ, he heals physically.
He heals people's lamest.
He calls the lame person to walk.
He heals those that have an uncontrolled bleeding.
He heals those.
He gives sight to
He gives sight to the blind.
He cures skin diseases.
Jesus Christ, he casts out demons.
Jesus Christ heals the relationship that we have with the Father because on the cross, he sheds his blood.
Jesus Christ, he drinks this bitter cup of God's wrath.
He drinks this bitter cup of sin and death so that we might know healing, so that we might know restoration.
Jesus Christ,
Symbolically, we can look back and read this passage and say, well, just as the waters were healed by this piece of wood, by this tree, now the Lord enters into our hearts.
He enters into our bitter soul, our bitter heart and our bitter life.
And He makes us sweet.
He makes us clean.
He makes us pleasing to the Lord.
And so we know now that God indeed is our healer.
God is our physical healer.
We had an Oasis group this past week and I was reminded, I was able to retell a story of how God healed me from a brain abscess that I had when I was eight years old.
How many of you have experienced the healing touch of a doctor, of a nurse, of a surgeon when they administer antibiotics or when they cast a broken bone or when they replace a failing joint?
their skill, their ability comes from the hand of the Lord's provision.
Well, how many times have we been sick, laid up in bed for a day or several days, unable to get out of bed, and that we're finally able to get back up again, and the great preacher Charles Spurgeon, he likens this to like a mini resurrection, where we are brought from death to life.
This is the Lord's design where he equips,
builds us, he designs us to fight off infection.
Even in our health, even when health is good, this comes at the hand of the Lord, who is our healer, the Lord, who is our protector.
Now, the number of times that we are sick, number of times that we are sick, it's number of times we can look to say, oh, God has healed us.
God has made us well again.
God has protected us.
But we do suffer, right?
We do get sick.
And sometimes the Lord does deem it necessary that we suffer, but when we suffer, we are led close to Him.
As the song said, we are assured that whenever we walk through this red sea road that we never walk alone, that the Lord brings us to these places of ultimate healing.
I was talking to one of our members, Kay, Kay Bolander.
I got her permission to share this with you all.
I was talking to her this past week.
And so for the last around four years, she's been suffering from liver trouble, where fluid will drain into her abdomen.
It's essentially, it's gonna bring her to the end of her life, which she's talked about, but she'll be the first person to look back and say, yes, that these years, these years have led me closer to the Lord, that although the Lord has not healed me of this, that the Lord has drawn me closer into fellowship with Him.
And she says, there's times, and she says, Lord, I'm ready.
Lord, I am ready for you to take me.
How can somebody say that?
unless they know that something better is coming, unless they know that there is healing up ahead.
For somebody who has an incurable issue, they know they're maybe going to be passing in the next month, or maybe they're going to die in the next year.
The only way to say that is to know there are these springs on the other side.
The foretaste of what we have now is going to be brought fully, and we enter into the next life.
God is our healer.
God is our healer physically.
But God is also our healer emotionally and spiritually.
But we often don't experience this until we are made to taste the bitter waters from which we are trying to drink.
Right before the Lord heals the waters of Mara,
The people taste its bitterness.
The people have to come to terms after journeying for three days.
Now they taste it and they spit it out.
It's gross, right?
Well, this is the same with us.
Before we are led to the healing of the Lord, the Lord often leads us to this place where we come to see deeply our own bitterness, our own brokenness, our own need for healing.
We're brought to a place where we see just how gross our actions and our words are to God and to other people, how repungent our sin is to the Lord.
The Lord brings us to a place where we're able to see just how much we complain against Him, how much we grumble against Him.
The Lord brings us to a place where we're able to see just how little we can do to heal ourselves.
The amount, the ability of Israel to cast something, to heal this waters by themselves is about our ability to heal our own souls.
We are pointed to Jesus Christ.
We are made to call out to our intercessor, Jesus Christ, the one who heals us physically, mentally and spiritually.
So as we begin,
in this new year.
As we begin as God's broken people saved by grace, this is where we turn.
This is where we have been given grace.
We are led to the grace of God's healing.
We are led to God's restoration.
We are led to find it in Yahweh Rafah, the great physician of Jesus Christ, our Lord.
All of God's people said, amen.
Grace, grace, grace, grace.
I want you to hear the word.
I want you to hear every sermon that I preach.
Hopefully I do the job of communicating God's grace.
God's unmerited favor for his people through Jesus Christ.
I don't want you ever leaving here feeling as if it is a burden to be one of God's people.
I want you to feel as if a burden has been lifted off, that we come to God with nothing and He gives us everything.
Grace is what I want to leave us with.
And as Israel has gone through the Red Sea and as they receive God's instruction, they're expected to respond.
Also in God's grace, they are given response.
And so I like to take this time for us to respond to God's grace.
For us to consider, well, where is God calling me to take action, maybe to change attitude?
Where is God calling me to have my life transformed by the power of his spirit?
So is there something in your life right now that is bitter?
Is it an attitude?
Is it a habit?
Is it words we've said?
Is the Lord opening your eyes somewhere to the bitterness of something in your life?
So that you will repent, so that you will cry out to Him, so that you will look to Him for your healing.
Where do you need the healing of Yahweh, Rafah?
Do you need it in your body?
Do you need it in your mind?
Do you need it in your spirit?
Have you been suffering for a while and the Lord's answer to your prayer has been not yet, my child?
Can you offer your trust?
Can you offer your obedience to the Lord even in this?
I want you to take a minute or two and consider, where is the Lord calling me to respond to His grace?
Yahweh, Raffa, the Lord, our healer.